
## [What is Python Excels?](./09_07_03_What_is_Python_Excels.html)

It’s time to give back. And get back. I’ll be sharing some ideas from the Python
programs I’ve written, and talk about what problems were solved. I like to share
work that is as complete as possible, so in most cases you should be able to
download the script and try it right away for yourself.

## [Installing Python](./2009_07_18_Installing_Python.html)

Getting started with Python is easy, you just need to download the Python
installation package and install onto your computer.

## [Using XLWT to Write Spreadsheets Without Excel](./2009_09_10_Using_XLWT_to_Write_Spreadsheets_Without_Excel.html)

Long before I even started thinking about writing a blog covering the
integration possibilities between Excel and Python, the folks at 
[Simplistix](http://www.simplistix.co.uk) were crafting some
of the handiest Python modules around: xlrd, xlwt and xlutils.

## [Another XLWT Example](./2009_09_19_Another_XLWT_Example.html)

After completing the [last
example](./2009_09_10_Using_XLWT_to_Write_Spreadsheets_Without_Excel.html), I
wanted to try something a little more interesting with XLWT this time around.

## [Basic Excel Driving with Python](./2009_09_29_Basic_Excel_Driving_With_Python.html)

Now it’s getting interesting. Reading and writing spreadsheets with XLRD and
XLWT (as discussed
[here](2009_09_10_Using_XLWT_to_Write_Spreadsheets_Without_Excel.html) and
[here](2009_09_19_Another_XLWT_Example.html)) is sufficient for many tasks, and
you don’t even need a copy of Excel to do it. But to really open up your data
and fully wring all the information possible from it, you’ll need Excel and its
powerful set of functions, pivot tables and charting.

## [Python Excel Mini Cookbook](./2009_10_05_Python_Excel_Mini_Cookbook.html)

To get you started, I’ve illustrated a number of common tasks you can do with
Python and Excel. Each program below is a self contained example, just copy it,
paste it and run it.

## [Mapping Excel VB Macros to Python](./2009_10_12_Mapping_Excel_VB_Macros_to_Python.html)

A handy feature in Excel is the ability to quickly record a Visual Basic (VB)
macro and save it. It’s also fairly simple to take a captured VB macro, tweak it
slightly and use it in your Python scripts.

## [Mapping Excel VB Macros to Python Revisited](2009_10_20_Mapping-Excel-VB-Macros-to-Python-Revisited.md)

The last post introduced a technique for recording a Visual Basic macro within
Excel and migrating it to Python. This exercise will build on those techniques
while leveraging Python for more of the work.

## [Cleaning Up Corporate ERP Data](./2009_11_09_Cleaning_Up_Corporate_ERP_Data.html)

The previous posts have used Excel and Python to create and manipulate small
spreadsheets. In reality, Python and Excel are especially well suited to
tackling large data sets. This post will illustrate some techniques for cleaning
up data downloaded from corporate ERP systems such as SAP and Oracle, and
getting it ready for some serious data mining with Excel.


